# Food-Desert-Mapping

## The Problem
Many urban areas lack places that provide fresh, quality food. The phenomenon is frequently referred to as a ‘food desert’ and is a pervasive problem in economic development. In building strong communities, it is essential that people have access to affordable, quality food and adequate nutrition. Unfortunately, many under-resourced communities and neighborhoods do not have grocery stores. People that do not have their own transportation (very common in cities) and work long hours or multiple jobs are hugely disadvantaged when they are not able to quickly and easily get to a grocery store. It forces dependence on unhealthier fast-food options that are more easily accessible. 
Applying Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) to grocery store data would allow insight into the food desert phenomenon. KDEs plot the relative density of grocery store locations. It would illuminate the areas that have relatively very few grocery store options. I hypothesize KDEs would demonstrate that Chicago, like many other cities, struggles with ensuring food access to all of its constituents. The areas with relatively few grocery stores will also likely be areas that tend to be under-resourced and disadvantaged in other ways. Grocery stores are less likely to build in places where the average household income is lower and where other businesses have not built.
KDEs would inform community and economic development decisions. The city, community developers, and grocery stores could utilize this information to make strategic decisions about where to build future grocery stores. Access to quality food is a critical piece of a strong community, so the city and community developers could use this information to understand places in need of grocery stores. They could decide to incentivize grocery stores to build in these areas, or devote further resources to these communities. Grocery stores themselves could benefit from the data in deciding where to build. Building in areas with less grocery stores could be advantageous for them as their competition would be lower.

## Data
I used data from the City of Chicago’s Data Portal: (1) latitude and longitude of grocery store locations in the city from 2013 and (2) shapefile of the city boundary.
URL Grocery Stores - https://data.cityofchicago.org/Community-Economic-Development/Map-of-Grocery-Stores-2013/ce29-twzt
URL City Boundaries - https://data.cityofchicago.org/Facilities-Geographic-Boundaries/Boundaries-City/ewy2-6yfk 

## Discussion of results
The KDEs reveal densities of grocery store locations. They indicate clear concentrations of grocery stores, with some areas that have very few grocery store options relative to the rest of the city. I compared my density plots to Google maps to get a sense of the areas that stood out. Both the circle that juts out of the upper left corner of the city and the southern tip of the city are lacking in grocery stores for good reason, as they are the airport and the Calumet Water Reclamation Plant, respectively. The low-density area that seems to cut horizontally across the middle of the state follows along Interstate 290 and is on the South end of the West side. Furthermore, just South of the downtown, the ‘South Side’ is also lacking in grocery stores. The northern half of the city seems to have a higher density of grocery stores, overall, than the southern half.

## Picking an optimal bandwidth (h)
Picking an optimal bandwidth (h) in Kernel Density Estimation is very difficult. In theory, the goal is to minimize the mean square error, or the Asymptotic Mean Integrated Squared Error (AMISE) (Cai, 2013). This, of course, is difficult to actually apply as we don’t know the true underlying function, f(x). If h is too small, there is a risk of over-fitting the data and finding shapes in data that may not be there. Alternatively, if h is too large the estimate may be too smooth, and we may lose the ability to uncover underlying shapes of importance. There is a bias-variance tradeoff that must be carefully considered in the context of each individual problem. An important consideration in determining an appropriate value of h is the number of observations (and the density of those observations) (Deng & Wickham, 2011). In this case, I only have 560 observations of grocery stores over a fairly large area. Thus, I need to be wary of choosing an h that is too small, at the risk of over-fitting. With a larger h, the standard deviation is higher, spreading the probability of a kernel to the surrounding kernels (r-bloggers). However, since a goal of these KDEs is to identify food deserts, h should be small enough to ensure that I don’t over-smooth and thus loose sight of the places that don’t have enough grocery store options that are adequately close. A variety of plug-in and optimization options exist for calculating h. The Hpi(), bw.nd() and bandwidth selector functions do this in R. 
